Section One
Version 2.00
Updated April 1997
Supersedes Ver 1.01


              PRUDENT FOOD STORAGE: Questions and Answers.

                            Section One

                 How do I store the foods I've chosen?

                    From the House at Cat's Green
                            Alan T. Hagan

       "In this work, when it shall be found that much is omitted,
        let it not be forgotten that much likewise is performed."

                                     Samuel Johnson, 1775, upon
                                    completion of his dictionary.
                                    Courtesy of James T. Stevens






                            FOREWORD

This work is a compilation of answers to frequently asked questions
(FAQ) concerning long term food storage. Its purpose is to promote an
understanding of the concepts, methods and techniques of long term food
storage. This is a work of several sections; the part you are now
reading is SECTION ONE.

There is commonality between food storage and food preservation even
though they are not precisely the same thing. Some of the information
here may be found in greater or lesser detail in one of the nine
sections of the rec.food.preserving (r.f.p.) FAQ compiled by Leslie
Basel. If you want the how to's of drying fruit, making jerky, canning
beans, fermenting pickles or corning beef then I refer you to her work
and the good stuff to be found there.

I will delve a bit more deeply than Leslie into the ins and outs of
how to put away your storage foods and have a reasonable expectation of
getting something edible back out of the container when you finally do
use it. Also covered will be food spoilage -- how to recognize it and
how to combat it. A resource list of where to find supplies and in-depth
information will be included at the end.

From time to time this file will be updated as sufficient relevant
information becomes available. Be of assistance -- point out mistakes,
write sections and reviews, provide us with new sources. All
contributors, if you wish, will be cited in this file.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Diana J. Hagan, for a *lot* of valuable
assistance, Susan Collingwood for sage advice, Al Durtschi for resources
and encouragement, Sandon A. Flowers, Mark West, Pyotr Filipivich, Denis
DeFigueiredo, Jenny S. Johanssen, Woody Harper, Higgins10, Kahless, Amy
Thompson(Saco Foods), Geri Guidetti, and last, but certainly not least,
Leslie Basel, without whom I'd never have attempted this in the first
place.

Updated: 9/18/96; 4/16/97

Copyright 1997 Alan T. Hagan. All rights reserved.

Excluding contributions attributed to specific individuals all
material in this work is copyrighted to Alan T. Hagan and all rights are
reserved. This work may be copied and distributed freely as long as the
entire text, my and the contributor's names and this copyright notice
remain intact, unless my prior permission has been obtained. This FAQ
may not be distributed for financial gain, included in commercial
collections or compilations, or included as a part of the content of
any website without prior, express permission from the author.


PLEASE DIRECT CONTRIBUTIONS, COMMENTS, QUESTIONS AND/OR CRITICISMS TO:
athagan@sprintmail.com

Written material may be sent to the address below:

A.T. Hagan
P.O.Box 140008
Gainesville, FL 32614-0008



TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION ONE: How Do I Store The Foods I've Chosen?

O.     Charter and Foreword

I.     Shelf Lives: Time, Temperature, Moisture and Light.

II.    The Techniques of Food Storage

        A.  Grains and Legumes
          1.  Grain Varieties
          2.  Legume Varieties
          3.  Types and Availability of Grains and Legumes
             - Moisture Content
             - Cleaning It Yourself
          4.  Storing Grains and Legumes
             - Moisture and Desiccants
             - Dry Ice
             - Compressed CO2 and Nitrogen
             - Oxygen Absorption Packets

        B.  Dry Milks
          1.  Selecting and Buying Dry Milks
             - Types of Dry Milks
             - Buying Dry Milk Products
          2.  Storing of Dry Milks
             - Shelf Life of Dry Milks

        C.  Canned Goods
          1.  Liquid Milk
             - Canned
             - Evaporated 
             - Sweetened Condensed
          2.  Corrosion Prevention of Canned Goods
             - Paraffin Method
             - Paste Wax Method
             - Spray Silicone

        D.  Sugar, Honey and Other Sweeteners

          1.  Buying and Storing Granulated, Powdered, Brown and Raw
              Sugars
          2.  Selecting and Buying Honey
             - Storing Honey
             - Raw Honey and Botulism
             - Honey Outgassing
          3.  Molasses, Cane, Sorghum and Table Syrups
          4.  Corn Syrup
          5.  Maple Syrup


        E.  Fats and Oils

        Y.  Cooking Staples

         1.  Baking Powder
         2.  Baking Soda
         3.  Salt
         4.  Vinegar
         5.  Yeast

        Z.  Infant Formula



SECTION TWO:   How Do I Keep It From Going Bad?

III.   Spoilage

        A.  Insect Infestations
          1.  Pests of Stored Dry Grains and Legumes
          2.  Control of Insect Infestations
          
        B.  Molds In Foods
          1.  Minimizing Molds
          2.  Molds in Canned Goods
          3.  Molds in Grains and Legumes

        C.  Bacterial Spoilage
          1.  Botulism
          2.  Other Bacterial Spoilers In Food

        D.  Enzymatic Action In Food Spoilage



SECTION THREE:   What Equipment Do I Need?
                Where Can I Find Information and Supplies?

IV.    Specific Equipment Questions

        A. Storage Containers
          1.  Plastic Containers
             - What Makes A Plastic Container "Food Grade"?
             - How Do I Get the Odor Out of Pickle Buckets?
             - Where Do I Find Food Grade Containers?
          2.  Metal Cans
          3.  Glass Jars

        B. CO2 and Nitrogen

        C. Oxygen Absorbers

        D. Desiccants

        E. Diatomaceous Earth


V.     Other Sources (besides this FAQ)

        A. Books
        B. Pamphlets
        C. Magazines
        D. Phone, voice, non-modem
        E. Electronic-online

VI.    Appendices

        A. Shelf Lives of Some Common Storage Foods
        B. Dating Codes Used By Some Food Manufacturers
        C. Food and Equipment Suppliers
          - Mail Ordering Storage Foods What You Should Know
          - Addresses of Suppliers.

=========================================================================
I -- SHELF LIVES: TIME, TEMPERATURE, MOISTURE AND LIGHT.
=========================================================================

Since the entire idea of a food storage program is that it should be
available for you and yours in times of need, it is desirable to gain an
understanding of those conditions that can affect the edibles stored in
your pantry.

Your storage program is only as good as the original quality of the
food that goes into it. It cannot get any better than what originally
goes in, but it can certainly get worse. In the fullness of time, all
stored foods will degrade in nutrient content and palatability until
they reach the inevitable end where even the dog won't eat them. It's
because of this eventuality that every article, book, and teacher
concerned with putting food by gives the same advice: Date all food
containers and rotate, Rotate, ROTATE.

It is important to remember when discussing the usefulness of
various foodstuffs that there are really *two* shelf lives to be
considered. The first shelf life is the nutrient content of the food.
This actually begins to degrade from the moment the food is harvested.
Three factors dictate nutritional shelf life: the food's initial
nutritional content, the processing steps the food underwent before it
was placed into storage, and its storage conditions. Eventually the
nutrition will dwindle away to nothing. At some point it will have to
be decided the remaining nutrition is not worth the space the food is
taking up and it should be rotated out of storage. This is the reason
for the "use by" dates on many foods and for shelf lives in general.

The second shelf life to consider is a food's absolute useful life
or the point at which you just can't gag it down. This will almost
always be far in excess of its nutritive life. We've all heard of people
eating many year old preserved foods such as jellies, MRE's and the
like. If you don't have anything to replace it with, it's not necessary
to throw food out just because it's reached the end of its nutritive
shelf life. Do, however, keep in mind that increasing age will only
further decrease the useful nutrition and increase the likelihood that
something may cause the food to spoil.

Within reason, the key to prolonging the storage life of your
edibles lies in lowering the temperature of the area in which they are
stored. The storage lives of most foods are cut in half by every
increase of 18 F (10 degrees Celsius). For example, if you've stored
your food in a garage that has a temperature of 90 F then you should
expect a shelf life less than half of what could be obtained at room
temperature (70 F) which in turn is less than half the storage life that
you could get if you kept them in your refrigerator at 40 F. Your
storage area should be located where the temperature can be kept above
freezing (32 F) and, if possible, below 72 F.

Ideally, your storage location should have a humidity level of 15%
or less, but unless you live in the desert it's not terribly likely
you'll be able to achieve this so you'll have to do the best that you
can. Regardless, moisture is not good for your stored edibles so you
want to minimize it as much as possible. This can be done by several
methods. The first is to keep your storage location air-conditioned
during the warm and humid times of the year. The second is to package
the goods in storage containers impervious to moisture and then to deal
with the moisture trapped inside. If you can, there's no reason not to
use both. All storage containers should be kept off the floor and out
of direct contact from exterior walls to reduce the chances of
condensation.

Once you've gotten temperature and humidity under control, it's
necessary to look at light. Light is a form of energy and when it
shines on your stored foods long enough it transfers some of that energy
to the food. That energy has the effect of degrading its nutritional
content and appearance. Fat soluble vitamins, such as A,D and E are
particularly sensitive to light degradation. It's a pretty sight to
look at rows and rows of jars full of delicious food, particularly if
you were the one that put the food in those jars. However, if you want
to keep them at their best, you'll admire them only when you turn the
light on in the pantry to retrieve a jar. If you don't have a room that
can be dedicated to this purpose then store the jars in the cardboard
box they came in. This will protect them not only from light, but help
to cushion them from shocks which might break a jar or cause it to lose
its seal. For those of you in earthquake country, it's a particularly
good idea. When "terra" is no longer "firma" your jars just might dance
right off onto the floor.

Assuming that it was properly processed in the first place, canned,
dried and frozen (never thawed) foods do not become unsafe when stored
longer than the recommended time, but their nutrient quality fades and
their flavor goes downhill.

=========================================================================
II -- THE TECHNIQUES OF FOOD STORAGE
=========================================================================

A. GRAINS AND LEGUMES 

A.1 GRAIN VARIETIES

One of the most important decisions in planning your long term food
storage are the kinds of grains you are going to store. Too many people
do not give this adequate thought, and just buy however much wheat they
think is necessary to meet their needs and leave it at that. Others rely
upon pre-packaged plans made for them by the storage food retailer who
put together the food package they've purchased. For many, either
decision could be a major mistake.

There are any number of food storage plans to be found by those who
take the time to look. Many of them are based on the so-called "Mormon
Four" of wheat, milk, honey and salt, with as many additional foods as
the planner finds to be desirable. Back in the thirties, when I believe
this plan first got its start, this may have been OK, but we've learned
a great deal since then. An unfortunate number of people in our society
have developed allergies to one kind of food or another. One of the more
common food allergens is wheat. Even more unfortunate is the fact that
of those with an allergy to this most common of grains, many of them are
not even aware of it. They won't become aware of it until they try to
live with wheat as a large part of their diet. This is the reason you
should store what you eat and eat what you store: so that ugly surprises
such as this don't come up when it's too late to easily avoid them.

A second reason to think about providing a variety of grains in your
food storage is appetite fatigue. There are many people who think
providing variety in the diet is relatively unimportant and that if and
when the time comes they'll eat what they've got and that will be that.
For healthy, well-adjusted adults under ordinary circumstances this
might be possible without too much difficulty. However, the entire
reason for having a *long term* food storage program is for when
circumstances *aren't* ordinary. Times of crisis produce stress --
possibly physical, but always mental. If you are suddenly forced to eat
a diet that is both alien and monotonous, it is going to add just that
much more stress on top of what you are already dealing with. If your
planning includes the elderly, young children and infants they might
just quit eating or refuse to eat sufficient amounts and become unable
to survive. This is not a trivial problem and should be given serious
consideration. Consider the positive aspects of adding some "comfort
foods".

In his book, *Making the Best of Basics*, James Stevens mentions a
post WWII study by Dr. Norman Wright, of the British Food Ministry,
which found that people in England and Europe were more likely to reject
unfamiliar or distasteful foods during times of stress than under normal
conditions. When it's wheat, day in and day out, then wheat's going to
start becoming distasteful pretty fast. Far better to have a variety of
foods on hand to forestall appetite fatigue and, more importantly, to
use those storable foods in your everyday diet so that you'll be
accustomed to them.

[If anyone knows where I may find an actual copy of the study by Dr.
Wright, I'd appreciate it if you'd point me to it. Thanks-ed.]

Below is a list of some common and uncommon grains presently
available in the marketplace. Because wheat is by far the most common
directly consumed grain in the United States I've put it at the head of
the list.



WHEAT: Wheat comes in a number of different varieties. Each variety is
more or less suitable for a given purpose based on its
characteristics. The most common classifications for wheat varieties are
spring or winter, hard or soft, red or white.

The hard wheats have kernels that tend to be small, and very hard
and have a high gluten content. Gluten is the protein in grains that
enables the dough made from them to trap the gasses produced by yeast
fermentation and raise the bread. Low gluten wheat does not produce as
good a loaf as high gluten wheat, though they can still be used for
yeast breads if necessary. As a general rule, hard varieties have more
protein than soft varieties.

The soft varieties have kernels tending to be larger, plumper and
softer in texture than hard wheats. Their gluten content is less and
these are used in pastries, quick breads, pastas, and breakfast cereals.

Winter wheats are planted in the fall, over winter in the field and
are harvested the next summer. Spring wheats are planted in the early
spring and are harvested in the fall. Red wheats comprise most of the
hard varieties while white wheats comprise most of the soft. Recently,
hard white wheats have been developed that are suitable for raised bread
making. Some feel the hard white varieties make a better tasting whole
wheat bread than the hard red.

The most commonly stored are the hard red varieties, either spring
or winter, because of their high protein. They should have a protein
content of no less than 12%, with higher the better. The hard white
spring wheats are still relatively new and are not yet widespread. They
have the same excellent storage characteristics as the hard red wheats.


AMARANTH: Amaranth is not a true cereal grain at all, but is a relative
of the pigweeds and the ornamental flowers we know as
cockscomb. It's grown not only for its seeds, but for its leaves that
can be cooked and eaten as greens. The grain is high in protein,
particularly the amino acid lysine which is limited in the true cereal
grains. The grains can be milled as-is, or the seeds can be toasted to
provide more flavor. The flour lacks gluten, so it's not suited for
raised breads, but can be made into any of a number of flat breads. Some
varieties can be popped much like popcorn, or can be boiled and eaten as
a cereal, used in soups, granolas, and the like. Toasted or untoasted,
it blends well with other grain flours.


BARLEY: Barley is thought by some to be the first grain ever grown by
man. It has short, stubby kernels with a hull that is
difficult to remove. Excluding barley intended for malting or animal
feed, most of this grain is consumed by humans in two forms. The most
common is the white, highly processed "pearl" barley that has had most
of its bran and germ milled off along with its hull. It is the least
nutritious form of barley. The second form it's found in is called
"pot" or "hulled" barley and it has been subjected to the same milling
process as pearled, but with fewer trips through the polisher. Because
of this, it retains more of the nutritious germ and bran. Unless you
are prepared to try to get the hulls off I don't recommend buying barley
still in the hull. Barley can be milled into flour, but its low gluten
content will not make a good loaf of raised bread. It can be combined
with other flours that have sufficient gluten to make good raised bread
or used in flat breads. Barley flour and flakes have a light nutty
flavor that is enhanced by toasting. Whole barley is commonly used to
add thickness to soups and stews.

Recently, a hull-less form of barley has become available on the
market through a few suppliers. This is whole grain barley with all of
its bran and germ intact and should have the most nutrients of any form
of this grain available.


BUCKWHEAT: Buckwheat is another of those foods commonly considered to
be a "grain", but which is not a true cereal. It is a close
relative to the docks and sorrels. The "grain" itself is a dark, three
cornered seed resembling a tiny beechnut. It has a hard, fibrous hull
that requires a special buckwheat huller to remove it. Here in the
U.S., it is most often used in pancakes, biscuits and muffins. In
eastern Europe and Russia it is known in its toasted form as kasha. In
the Far East, it's often made into soba or noodles. It's also a good
bee plant, producing a dark, strongly flavored honey. The flour is
light or dark depending on how much of the hull has been removed before
grinding. Dark flour is far superior nutritionally as you might expect,
but it also much more strongly flavored. Buckwheat is one of those foods
with no middle ground in peoples opinions -- they either love it or they
hate it. Like amaranth, it's high in lysine, an amino acid commonly
lacking in the true cereal grains.


CORN: Corn is the most commonly grown grain in the U.S., but it is
mostly consumed indirectly as animal feed or even industrial
feedstock rather than directly as food. Nevertheless, it comes in an
amazing variety of forms and, like wheat, some of them are better suited
for a particular purpose than others. The varieties intended to be
eaten as fresh, sweet corn are very high in sugar content and do not dry
or store well. The other varieties are the flint, dent, and popcorns.
All of them keep well when they have been properly dried. To a certain
extent, they're all interchangeable for purposes of grinding into meal
or flour, but some make better meal than flour and vice versa. As a
general rule of thumb, the flint varieties make better meal as they have
a grittier texture than the dent corns which make better flour. If
meal, hominy and grits are what you are most interested in, use the
flint type. If you intend to make corn masa for tortillas and tamales,
then the dent type is what you want. Popcorn is what you need if you
want to pop it for snacks and it can also be ground into meal or flour.
It seems to me it makes a very good meal, but it's just a bit gritty for
flour. Your mileage may vary.

Popcorn is one form of a whole grain available to nearly everyone if
they know where to look. Since it's so popular as a snack food,
particularly in movie theaters and events like fairs and ball games,
even the smallest of towns will generally have at least one business
selling it in twenty five or fifty pound bags. Since it's meant to be
eaten it's safe for food. To be at its most poppable, this corn needs
to have a moisture content between 13.5%-15.5% which makes it just a
little too moist for ideal storage. A small amount of drying will need
to be done before it's packed away. If wanted for popping later, it can
always be re-hydrated by sprinkling a small amount of water on the
kernels, shaking vigorously and allowing it to be absorbed.

Once you've decided between flint, dent or popcorn, you now have to
decide upon it's color: there are yellow, white, blue, & red dried
varieties. The yellow and white types are the most common by far with
the blues and reds mostly being relegated to curiosities, though blue
corn has been gaining in popularity these last few years. It should be
kept in mind that white corn does not have the vitamin A content of
yellow. Since vitamin A is one of the major limiting vitamins in long
term food storage, any possible source of it should be utilized so for
this reason I suggest storing yellow rather than white corn.
Additionally, much of the niacin content of corn is chemically bound up
in a form not available for human nutrition unless it has been treated
with an alkali. If grits, hominy or corn masa are not a part of your
diet and you're storing corn, it is a very good idea to begin to develop
a taste for some or all of these alkali treated forms of corn foods.


MILLET: Millet is an important staple grain in North China, and India,
but is little known as a food in the U.S, mostly being used as
bird feed. The grain kernels are very small, round, and usually ivory
colored or yellow, though some varieties are darker. The lack of gluten
and a rather bland flavor may account for the anonymity of this grain
here, but it's alkaline content is higher than other grains and makes it
very easy to digest. It also has a higher iron content than any other
grain but amaranth. It swells a great deal when cooked and supplies
more servings per pound than any other grains. When cooked like rice it
makes an excellent breakfast cereal. Though it has little gluten of its
own, it mixes well with other flours.


OATS: Though the Scots and the Irish have made an entire cuisine from
oats, they are still mostly thought of in this country as a bland
breakfast food. It is seldom found as a whole grain, usually being sold
processed in one form or another. Much like barley, oats are a
difficult grain to separate from their hulls. Besides their longtime
role as a breakfast food, where they can be made very flavorful with a
little creative thought, oats make an excellent thickener of soups and
stews and a filler in meat loafs and casseroles. Probably the second
most common use for oats in this country is in cookies and granolas.

Listed below in order of desirability for storage are the forms of
oats most often found in this country. Rolled and cut oats retain both
their bran and their germ.

Oat groats: These are whole oats with the hulls removed. They are
not often found in this form, but can sometimes be had from natural food
stores and some storage food dealers. Oats are not the easiest thing to
get a consistent grind from so producing your own oat flour takes a bit
of experience.

Steel cut oats: These are oat groats which have been cut into chunks
with steel blades. They're not rolled and look like coarse bits of
grain. This form can be found in both natural food stores and many
supermarkets.

Rolled oats: These are also commonly called "old fashioned" or
"thick cut" oats. To produce them, oat groats are steamed and then
rolled to flatten. They can generally be found wherever oats are sold.
They take longer to cook to suit than do the quick cooking oats, but
they retain more flavor and nutrition. This is what most people will
call to mind when they think of oatmeal.

Quick cooking rolled oats: These are just steamed oat groats rolled
thinner than the regular or old fashioned kind so that they will cook
faster. They can usually be found right next to the thicker rolled
oats.

Instant rolled oats: These are the "just add hot water" or
microwave type of oat cereals and are not at all suited for a long term
food storage program. They do, however, have uses in "bug out" and 72
hour food kits for short term crises.

Whole oats: This is with the hulls still on. They are sold in seed
stores and sometimes straight from the farmer who grew them. Unless
you have some means of getting the hulls off, I don't recommend buying
oats in this form. If you do buy from a seed supplier, make certain
that they have not been treated with any chemicals that are toxic to
humans.


RICES: Rice is the single most commonly consumed food grain in the
world. The U.S. is the leading exporter of it, though we
actually only produce about 1% of the global supply. It is my favorite
grain and in the form of brown rice, we eat a great deal of it here at
the House.

Much like wheat and corn, rice comes in a number of varieties, each
with different characteristics. They are typically divided into classes
by the length of their kernel grains; short, medium and long.

Short grain rice: Short grain rice is a little softer and bit
moister when it cooks and tends to stick together more than the longer
rices. It has a sweeter, somewhat stronger flavor than long grain rice.

Medium grain rice: Medium grain rice is not very common in this
country. It has flavor like short grain rice, but with a texture more
like long grain rice.

Long grain rice: Long grain rice cooks up into a dryer, flakier
dish than the shorter grains and the flavor tends to be blander. It is
the most commonly found size of rice on the grocery shelves.

Each of these may be processed into brown, white, parboiled or
converted and instant rices. Below is a short discussion of the
differences between the various types of rices.

Brown rice: This is whole grain rice with only the hull removed. It
retains all of the nutrition to be found in rice and has a pleasant
nutty flavor when boiled. From a nutrition standpoint it is by far the
best of the rices to put into storage, but it has one flaw: The
essential oil in the germ of the rice is very susceptible to oxidation
and soon goes rancid. As a result, brown rice has a shelf life of only
about six months from the date of purchase unless given special
packaging or storage processing. Freezing or refrigeration will greatly
extend its storage life. It's also possible to purchase brown rice from
long term food suppliers specially packaged in air tight containers with
an inert nitrogen atmosphere. In this kind of packaging, (if properly
done), the storage life of brown rice can be extended for years.

Converted rice: Converted rice starts as brown rice which undergoes
a process of soaking and steaming until it is partially cooked. It is
dried and then polished to remove the bran and germ. The steaming
process drives some of the vitamins and minerals from the outer layers
into the white inner layers. This makes it more nutritious than
polished white rice, but also makes it more expensive.

White rice: This is raw rice that has had its outer layers milled
off, taking with it about 10% of its protein, 85% of its fat and 70% of
its mineral content. Because so much of the nutrition of the rice is
lost, white rice sold in this country has to be enriched with vitamins
to *partially* replace what was removed.


QUINOA: Quinoa is yet another of the "grains" that is not a true
cereal. It's botanical name is Chenopodium quinoa (pronounced
"keen-wah"), and is a relative of the common weed Lambsquarter. The
individual kernels are about 1.5-2 mm in size and are shaped rather like
small flattened spheres, yellow in color. When quinoa is cooked, the
germ of the grain coils into a small "tail" that lends a pleasant
crunch. This exotic grain should be thoroughly washed before cooking in
order to prevent the cooked product from tasting bitter. There are
several varieties of quinoa that have color ranging from near white to a
dark brown. The larger white varieties are considered superior and are
the most common found.


RYE: Rye is a well known bread grain in this country, though not as
popular as wheat. It has dark brown kernels longer and thinner
than wheat, but less gluten. Bread made from this grain tends to be
somewhat dense unless gluten is added (often in the form of a lot of
wheat flour) with color that ranges from pale to dark brown. German
pumpernickel, made with unrefined rye flour and molasses, is the
blackest, densest form. Rye makes for excellent variety in the diet.

What I am about to say in the following is for those who may be
interested in buying field run rye straight from the producer or
distributor before it has been cleaned. If you purchase your rye from a
food store *after* it has been cleaned, it is not much of a concern.

There is a fungal infection of grain called "ergot". It is
attracted to rye more so than other grains, particularly if the growing
conditions were damp where it was grown. This fungus causes a nervous
disorder known as St. Anthony's fire. When eaten in large quantities
the ergot alkaloids can cause constriction of the blood vessels,
particularly in the extremities. The effects of ergot poisoning are
cumulative and lead to numbness of the limbs and other, frequently
serious symptoms.

The fungal disease affects only the flowering parts of many members
of the grass family. The fungus bodies are hard, spur like, purple
black structures that replace the kernel in the grain head. The ergot
bodies can vary in size from the length of the kernel to as much as
several times as long. They don't crush as easily as smut bodies of
other funguses. When they are cracked open, the inner broken faces are
can be off-white, yellow, or tan. The infected grain looks very
different from ordinary, healthy rye grains and can be spotted easily.
Ergot only rarely affects other grains. If you purchase field run rye,
you should closely examine it first for the presence of ergot bodies. If
you find more than a very few, pass up that grain and look elsewhere.


SORGHUM: Sorghum is probably more widely known in this country for the
syrup made from the juice squeezed from the canes of one of
its many varieties. Also widely called "milo", it is one of the
principle cereal grains grown in Africa. Its seeds are somewhat round,
a little smaller than peppercorns, with an overall brown color with a
bit of red and yellow mixed in. The varieties called "yellow endosperm
sorghum" have a better taste. Sorghum is a major feed grain in the
southwestern part of the country and is where the vast majority of the
national milo production goes to. Like most of the other grains,
sorghum is low in gluten, but the seeds can be milled into flour and
mixed with higher gluten flours or made into flat breads, pancakes or
cookies. In the Far East, it is cooked and eaten like rice, while in
Africa it is ground in meal for porridge. It's also commonly brewed
into alcoholic beverages.


TRITICALE: Triticale is not a creation sprung whole from the foreheads
of Star Trek script writers, tribbles notwithstanding. It
is, in fact, a cross or hybrid between wheat and rye. This youngest
grain combines the productivity of wheat with the ruggedness of rye and
has a high nutrition value. Triticale kernels are gray-brown, oval
shaped larger-than-wheat kernels and plumper than rye. It will make a
raised bread like wheat flour will, but the gluten is a bit weak so
wheat flour is frequently added to strengthen it. Because of the
delicate nature of its gluten, excessive kneading must be avoided. This
grain can be used in much the same way wheat or rye is. Although it is
the youngest of the grains, it's been around for some years now. For
reasons I've never understood, triticale has never achieved much
popularity. Whether this is for reasons of agricultural production or
public acceptance I don't know.



A.2 LEGUME VARIETIES

Unless a person is willing to spend a great deal of money on
preserved meats, a food storage program not including a quantity of
legumes is simply incomplete. There are few non-animal foods that
contain the amount of protein to be found in dried beans, peas, and
lentils. The varieties commonly available in this country have protein
contents ranging from 20%-35%. As with most non-animal proteins, they
are not complete in themselves for purposes of human nutrition, but
become so when they are combined with the incomplete proteins found in
grains. It is for this reason that grains and legumes are so often
mentioned together. In cultures all over the world, it is common to
find the two served together at a meal, making a complete protein, even
when those doing the serving have no understanding of nutrition at all.

The legume family, of which all beans, peas, lentils,and peanuts are
a part of, is one of the largest in the plant kingdom. Because of this
and the many thousands of years of development and cultivation that man
has given them, the variety of edible legumes available to us is huge.
Both the appearance and the names of legume varieties are colorful and
varied. The names range from "adzuki" beans, a type of soybean from the
Orient, to "zipper" peas, a commonly found field pea here in the South.
The color of the beans can range from a clean white, to deep red, dull
green to flat black with thousands of mixtures and patterns of colors.

In spite of this incredible variety of names and colors, legumes are
largely interchangeable in cooking usage, although some dishes just
wouldn't be the same if a different type was used. Below is a partial
list of some of the more commonly eaten bean varieties here in the U.S.

BLACK BEAN: Also known as turtle beans, these small, dark-brownish
black, oval-shaped beans are probably best known to us in
Cuban black bean soup. They are very commonly used in Central and South
America and in China. They tend to bleed very darkly when cooked so
they are not well suited to being combined with other beans, lest they
give the entire pot a muddy appearance.

BLACK-EYED PEA: Although there is tremendous variation among the many
varieties of field peas eaten throughout the Southern
United States, it is black-eyed peas that are the most commonly known
nationwide. The coloring of field peas is as varied as the rest of the
legume family, with black-eyed peas being small and oval-shaped with an
overall creamy color and, of course, their distinctive black-eye. Dried
field peas cook very quickly and combine very tastily with either rice
or cornbread.

CHICKPEA: Also known as the garbanzo bean, it tends to be a creamy or
tan color, rather lumpily roundish and larger than dried
garden peas. Many have eaten chickpeas, even if they've never seen a
whole one. They are the prime ingredient in hummus and falafel and are
one of the oldest cultivated legume species known, going back as far as
5400 B.C. in the Near East.

KIDNEY BEANS: Just like the rest of the family, kidney beans can be
found in wide variety. They come in both light and dark
red color in their distinctive kidney shape. Probably best known here
in the U.S. for their use in chili, they figure prominently in Mexican,
Brazilian and Chinese cuisine.

LENTILS: Lentils are an odd lot. They don't fit in with either the
beans or the peas and occupy a place by themselves. Their
shape is different from the other legumes being roundish little discs
with colors ranging from muddy brown, to green to a rather bright
orangish-red. They cook very quickly compared to beans and have a
distinctive flavor. They are much used in Far Eastern cuisine from
Indian to Chinese.

LIMA BEANS: In the South, they are also commonly called butter beans.
They are one of the most common beans found in this country
in all manner of preservation from the young small beans to the large
fully mature type. Their flavor is pleasant, but a little bland. Their
shape is rather flat and broad with colors ranging from pale green to
speckled cream and purple.

PEANUTS: The peanut is not actually a nut at all, but a legume.
Peanuts are another odd species not much like the more
familiar beans and peas. Whatever their their classification they are
certainly not unfamiliar to U.S. eaters. Peanuts have a high protein
percentage and even more fat. They are one of the two legume species
commonly grown for oilseed in this country, they are also used for
peanut butter, boiled and roasted peanuts. Many Central and South
American, African and Chinese dishes incorporate peanuts so they are
useful for much more than just a snack food or cooking oil.

PINTO BEANS: Anyone who has eaten Tex-Mex food has probably had the
pinto bean. It is one of the most commonly eaten beans in
the U.S., particularly in the southwestern portion of the country. It
is stereotypically bean shaped with a dappled pattern of tans and browns
on its shell. Pintos have a flavor that blends well with many foods.
When ground together with white or navy beans they make my favorite
home-made version of falafel.

SOYBEANS: An entire university could be founded on the culinary and
industrial uses of the soybean. It is by far the legume with
the highest protein content in commercial production as well as being
the other legume oilseed producer alongside the peanut. The beans
themselves are small, and round with a multitude of different shades.
Although the U.S. grows a very large percentage of the global supply of
these beans, we actually consume virtually none of them directly. Most
of them go into cattle feed or are used by industry. What does get
eaten directly has usually been processed in some form or fashion.
Soybean products range from tofu, to tempeh, to textured vegetable
protein and hundreds of other uses. Although they are very high in
protein, they don't lend themselves well to just being boiled until done
and eaten the way other beans and peas do. For this reason, if you plan
on keeping some as a part of your storage program (and you should) you
would be well served to begin to learn how to process and prepare them
*now* when you're not under pressure to produce. That way you can throw
out your mistakes and order pizza, rather than having to choke them
down, regardless.


A.3 TYPES OF AVAILABILITY OF GRAINS AND LEGUMES

Grains and legumes of all types may be purchased in a number of
different fashions depending largely on where you live and the time of
year. If you should happen to live in the area where the type of grain
or legume that you are interested in purchasing is grown you may be able
to purchase direct from the producer or distributor.

If you are interested in doing this, you may be able to find what
you want at any processing step along the way. The most basic form is
called "field run" which means that it's been harvested and sold shortly
thereafter. It will not have been given any cleaning or processing and
is likely to be rather dirty depending upon the conditions under which
it was grown and harvested.

A second basic form called "field run from storage" is grain that
has been harvested and then put into storage for a time. It will have
all of the dirt and detritus of field run grain and whatever it may have
picked up from the silo as well.

If you want cleaner grain you should look for "pre-cleaned" which
means that it has been passed through fans, screens or sieves to remove
chaff, smut balls, insect parts, mouse droppings and other debris.

For those of us who don't live in an area that produces the grain
and legumes that we're interested in, we have to resort to the last type
which is "pre-cleaned and pre-packaged". This is grain that's been
harvested, cleaned and put up in bags or other containers-possibly even
going so far as to already be packaged for long term storage.

Each of the above types of availability has its good and bad points.
As you might expect, the more processing the product receives, the
higher its price is likely to be. If you don't mind doing a little
cleaning and you need to be frugal with your cash, then field run grain
is the way to go.

IMPORTANT NOTE: If you have purchased your grains and legumes from
a food store or a foods dealer then you needn't
worry about hidden mold infections, fungicides or insecticides that are
unsafe for human consumption. The products will have been checked at
least several times by the Federal and state agriculture dept's and
probably by the major foods dealers as well, to insure its quality.

This is not *necessarily* the case when you purchase your grains or
legumes direct from the farmer or elevator operator as field run or
field run from storage grain. Nor is it necessarily the case if you've
made the decision to utilize grains marketed as animal feed.

If you are buying your grains and legumes from some-place other than
a food store then you need to know the history of what it is you are
buying. Straight field run grain, other than being dirty, is not likely
to have had anything added to it that would make it undesirable for
human consumption. There is, however, the small possibility it may have
been infected with molds that would make it unsafe for eating. Field run
from storage and any grade of grain not specifically advertised for
human consumption may have had fumigants, fungicides or insecticides not
certified as safe for human foods added to it while it was in the bin.
It is important to know what it has been treated with before you buy it.

Sometimes grain in the form of animal feed or seed grain/legumes is
available. Keep in mind animal feeds may have a higher contaminant
level than what is permissible for human consumption. Under certain
circumstances, the government allows the sale of grain or legumes for
animal feed that could not be sold for direct human consumption. If
that feed is to be fed to non-lactating (non-dairy animals), they will
sometimes allow an aflatoxin content of five times what is permissible
for use in human foodstuffs. It may even be mixed varieties of one
grain and not all one type. Seed grains, in particular, must be
investigated carefully to find out what they may have been treated with.
It is quite common for seed to have had fungicides applied to them, and
maybe other chemicals as well.

If you do purchase field run grain of any sort, examine it closely
for contamination and moldy grain. Ask the farmer or distributor
whether it has been tested for mold or mycotoxin content. This is
especially the case if you are buying field-run corn, rye, soybeans and
rice. When you purchase direct from the field, you may be getting it
before it has been checked. Be certain of what it is that you are
getting and ask questions if you choose to go this route. Know who you
are dealing with. Unless you just can't find any other source, I don't
recommend using animal feed or seed grains for human food.


A.3.1 MOISTURE CONTENT

The moisture content of the grain or legume you want to purchase or
grow has a major impact on how long you will be able to store it and
have it remain nutritious and edible. Some of the information I have
found says that grain with a moisture content as high as 12% can be
safely put into long term storage, but there is a risk to storing grain
at that moisture level that should be understood.

The outside of each and every kernel of grain or bean you buy or
grow may host thousands of fungi spores and bacteria. This is all
perfectly natural and is not a reason to panic. The problem lies in
that at moisture levels between 13.5% to 15% some fungal species are
able to grow and reproduce. Other species require a moisture level in
the 16-23% range. Aerobic bacteria (oxygen using) require a moisture
level of about 20%.

Thus, if you have grain you want to store with a moisture content as
high as 12% you are perilously close to having enough moisture to enable
mold growth which could lead to the ruin of your grain. For this
reason, I suggest keeping all grains and legumes to a moisture content
of no more than 10%.

If you do not have a clue as to what the moisture level of your
grain is here is a rough method to determine it.

Take 20 ounces of the grain or legumes in question from the middle
of its bag or container (this needs to be an actual weighed twenty
ounces and not estimated.) Spread the grain in a large baking dish
making sure it is not more than an inch deep. Heat at 180 F for about
two hours, stirring occasionally. Allow the grain to cool where it
won't readsorb moisture, the oven will do. Once cool, reweigh the
grain. A one ounce loss in weight indicates the grain had roughly a
five percent moisture content, 2 ounces indicates that it has a 10%
moisture content, etc, etc. You might even be able to cut it as fine as
a half oz loss, but I wouldn't try to take it further than that.

Obviously, this is only a rough measure, but it works and I don't
have a better idea that could be used by an individual in the home. If
anyone has a better way of measuring moisture levels which can be done
without a lab or special equipment I'd surely like to hear it.


A.3.2 CLEANING IT YOURSELF

If you've chosen to purchase field-run grain or if the pre-cleaned
product you've bought isn't clean enough to suit you, you can do it
yourself.

The fastest and easiest method is "fanning", a form of winnowing.
This is done by pouring the grain slowly through the air stream of a fan
or blower into a clean, deep container such as a cardboard box or trash
can. The wind blowing through the falling grain will blow out most of
the broken kernels, chaff, smut balls, mouse droppings, etc. If you're
losing too much good grain, try turning the fan down or moving it
further back from the container. The deep container will cut down on
the amount of kernels that bounce out. Repeat fanning as necessary
until the grain is clean enough to suit or you've blown all of the
lighter contaminants out.

If the fanning didn't get the grain clean enough then it can be
further cleaned by running it through a screen or sieve. This should be
made with holes just big enough to pass an average sized grain of what
it is you're cleaning. Obviously, the size of the holes will
necessarily vary depending upon the kernel size of the grain.

Should the kernels still not be clean enough to suit then you'll
just have to resort to "hand picking" out the offending particles. I'd
strongly suggest doing this just prior to grinding where it can be done
in small batches rather than trying to do your entire storage all at
once. It's much easier to do a few pounds at a time than fifty or a
hundred.

If you have it in mind to wash the grain, this should not be done
prior to storage, but, rather, just before use. After it's been rinsed,
it should be dried immediately in the oven by placing it no deeper than
1/2 inch and heated at 150 F for an hour. It should be stirred
occasionally to improve drying.



A.4 STORING GRAINS AND LEGUMES


A.4.1 Moisture and Desiccants

The key to storing grains and legumes for the long term is dry, dry,
dry. Available oxygen and storage temperature also play roles, but it
is moisture content that determines whether you get usable food out in
five years or not.

Therefore, the idea here is to have the food you want to put into
storage as dry as possible before it goes in and then take steps to deal
with any moisture trapped, generated or leaked into your storage
containers.

Ideally, the clean grains and legumes you have on hand will be no
more than 10% moisture. If this is the case then you can go ahead and
seal them into your storage containers using the packaging method of
your choice and have a reasonable expectation of your food staying in
good condition.

If your storage grains aren't sufficiently low in moisture content
then you'll need to reduce the water they contain. Wheat has been taken
out of Egyptian pyramids where it had lain for several thousand years.
It was the bone dry desert air and the cool interior temperature of the
pyramids which kept it from rotting away. We can approximate that
Egyptian climate by several methods.

The least involved method is to wait until the driest time of year
for your location. I typically wait until January here in Florida. If
this doesn't suit, then turn your air conditioning on a little high.
Bring in your buckets, lids, and the storage food. Let everything sit
in a well-ventilated place where it's going to get plenty of cool from
the a/c. I'd avoid anywhere near the kitchen or bathroom areas, as they
put out a lot of moisture. Stir the grains or legumes frequently to
maximize moisture loss. About three days of cool, constant air flow and
low humidity ought to dry things out a bit.

If this won't do, you can place a large quantity of desiccant in
your storage containers. Fill the remaining space with your food
product and seal on the lid. After about a week, unseal and check the
desiccant. If it's saturated, change it out with dry desiccant and
reseal. Continue to do this until the contents are sufficiently dry. If
it doesn't become saturated the first time, change it anyway before
sealing the bucket permanently. You'd hate to find later it saturated in
storage.

I use silica gel for practically everything. Keep in mind that it
is not edible and you don't want it getting mixed into your food. My
usual procedure is to save or scrounge clear plastic pill bottles such
as 500ct aspirin bottles. Fill the bottle with the desiccant (remember
to dry the gel first) and then use a double thickness of coffee filter
paper carefully and securely tied around the neck of the bottle to keep
any of it from leaking out. This way whatever moisture does
inadvertently get trapped inside can be safely absorbed. It won't dry
out a *lot* of moisture -- you still need to take steps to get
everything as dry as possible before you pack it -- but it will take
care of what little is left.

Once you've dealt with the moisture problem, then you can decide
whether you want to displace and/or absorb the oxygen out of your
storage container. There are three common methods of doing this. The
first two use relatively inert gasses, carbon dioxide and nitrogen, to
displace the oxygen. The third uses an oxygen-absorbing chemical to
remove very nearly all of the gas from the container's atmosphere. Some
folks use inert gas displacement and oxygen absorption together.


A.4.2 Dry Ice

Using dry ice to displace oxygen from food storage containers is a
very straightforward affair. To prevent leaching plastic chemicals from
the container into your food over a long period of time I recommend
lining the bucket with a brown paper bag before filling the bucket with
your product. Be sure to wipe any accumulated frost off of the ice and
wrap it in a paper towel or something similar so you don't burn anything
that comes into contact with it. Put the dry ice at the bottom and fill
the container. Shake or vibrate it to get as much density in the packing
as possible and to exclude as much air as you can. Put the lid on, but
do not fully seal it. You want air to be able to escape. Ideally, the
dry ice should slowly evaporate and the cool CO2 should fill the bottom
of the bucket, displacing the warmer, lighter atmosphere and pushing it
out the top of the container. About four ounces of dry ice per five
gallon bucket is plenty. Do not move or shake the bucket while the dry
ice is sublimating. You want to keep mixing and turbulence to a
minimum. After about three hours go ahead and seal the lids, but check
on them every fifteen minutes or so for an hour to be certain that
you're not getting a pressure build up. If you don't have to let any
gas off, then put them away. A *little* positive pressure inside the
bucket is a good thing, but don't allow it to bulge.

WARNING: Dry ice (frozen carbon dioxide) is *extremely* cold and
can cause burns to the skin by merely touching it for only a couple of
seconds. Because of this you should wear gloves whenever handling it.
Also, dry ice evaporates into carbon dioxide gas, which is why we want
it. CO2 is not inherently dangerous, but you should make sure the area
you are packing your storage containers in is adequately ventilated so
the escaping gas will not build to a level dangerous enough to
asphyxiate you.


A.4.3 Compressed CO2 or Nitrogen

Using compressed gasses calls for a slightly different technique.
You'll need some plastic bags that are a bit larger in internal volume
than the bucket, and some brown paper bags to fit inside the plastic
bags. Additionally, you'll need a tank of the compressed gas that you've
chosen, a hose to attach to it and a length of straight stiff tubing
just longer than the bucket to attach to the end of the hose. Last
you'll need a pack of matches or a cigarette.

Line the interior of the container with the plastic bag and then
line the plastic bag with a clean brown paper one. Fill the bucket with
grain, shaking to get it as full as possible. You don't want any pockets
left between the plastic bag and the container. Once you have gotten it
full to just short of not being able to fully put on the lid, gather the
top of the plastic bag together. Take the hose with the copper tubing
on the end and insert it to the bottom of the grain, (take care not to
tear the bags), and close the top of the bags around it. Turn on the
valve and begin to fill the bags with gas. You want to fill it *slowly*
so you can minimize turbulence and mixing as much as you can. I
generally will just gradually crack the valve until I can hear it begin
to hiss out and then put my hand over the end of the probe to feel how
fast it's flowing. It'll take a little while to fill each bucket --
about five minutes per bucket. Just as with the dry ice above, the idea
here is for the cool gas to displace the warmer atmosphere from the
container. The bags should puff just a bit. When I think it's full
I'll hold a lit match just above the bag in the air that is escaping
from it. If it snuffs right out then I figure the oxygen has been
displaced, I let it run for a minute longer and remove the probe. Tie
the bag off and seal the bucket. Again, you want to have the bucket as
full as possible so that there'll be only minimal air space.


IMPORTANT NOTE: I want to insert a note of caution here about
packing foods with nitrogen or CO2. Either gas will do very well for
oxygen displacement inside the bucket, but the technique that you use is
very important. Dry ice is extremely cold and if there is much moisture
in the air trapped in the container with it, and your food, then it will
condense. If there's enough of it, it's going to cause you problems. If
you are going to put the dry ice in the bucket, you'll really want to do
this on a day when the humidity is very low. The temperature of the gas
coming out of the tank has concerned me, also, since it is rather cold.
I like to use as long a hose as I can get to allow the gas to expand and
warm as much as possible before it goes into the bucket. An idea that
I've had, but have not yet tried is to hook the hose to a copper coil
(like with a moonshine still) and have the gas go through it to warm
before putting it into the container. The next time we do any
experimentation with this I think I will. Whether you use dry ice or
compressed gas, I would add about four ounces of desiccant to a five
gallon bucket of stored food.


A.4.4 Oxygen Absorption Packets

If all of this messing about with gasses sounds like too much
trouble, you can try using the oxygen absorption packets that have come
onto the market in the last ten years or so. Please see Section Two,
IV.C Oxygen Absorbers for specific instructions in their use. Be certain
that you do, in fact, have an air tight seal or you'll just deplete your
packets over time to no positive effect.


Once I started using the method above with the drying out of the
containers and foodstuffs, the *careful* atmospheric displacement with
inert gasses and the desiccant, I've never lost a container of storage
goods due to mold. If you've done a proper job with the gasses, you'll
kill any insects or insect eggs as well. After that, it's just age and
storage temperatures that degrade the nutritional contents of the foods.
You should have a rotation plan to deal with this before it becomes a
problem. Take care in your technique, use only quality goods and
you'll have food you can eat when you open those containers.


B. DRY MILKS

1 SELECTING AND BUYING DRY MILKS

B.1.1 TYPES OF DRY MILKS


NONFAT DRY MILK. This is pasteurized skim milk reduced to a powdered
concentrate. It can be found in two forms, regular and instant. They
are both made from milk in a spray-drying process, but the instant
variety has been given further processing to make it more easily soluble
in water than regular dry milk. Both types have the same nutrient
composition. The regular variety is more compact and requires less
storage space than the instantized variety, but it is more difficult to
reconstitute. The most easily found variety is the instant, available
in nearly any grocery store. The regular variety has to be sought out
from baking and restaurant suppliers and storage food dealers.

It takes about 3 tablespoons of instant nonfat dry milk added to 8
ozs of water to make 1 cup of milk you can drink or cook with just like
fresh milk, albeit with a considerable flavor difference. Combine the
dry milk with water at least several hours before you plan to use it to
give it time to dissolve fully and to develop a fresher flavor. Shaking
the fluid milk vigorously will incorporate air and will also help to
improve flavor. I don't care for the stuff to drink, but instead add the
powder to baked goods, gravies, smoothies, hot cereals, casseroles and
meat loaf as a nutrition booster.


FLAVORED NONFAT DRY MILK. This may be found packaged in a variety
of forms from a low calorie diet drink (artificially sweetened) to the
other end of the scale, as cocoa mix or malted milk. The key ingredient
is the dry milk so buy and store these products accordingly.


DRY WHOLE MILK. This dry milk has a higher fat content and
therefore a shorter shelf life than nonfat. Other than that, it can be
used in exactly the same way. Dry whole milk is difficult to find, but
can sometimes be found where camping and outback supplies are sold.


DRY BUTTERMILK. Dry buttermilk is for use in recipes calling for
buttermilk. Since it has a slightly higher fat content than nonfat dry
milk, it generally does not keep as long.


B.1.2 BUYING DRY MILK PRODUCTS

(a)- Be sure the dry milk you are buying has been fortified with
vitamins A and D. All of the nonfat dry milks I've seen come fortified
with these two vitamins. The dry buttermilk does not come this way, at
least the SACO brand does not. I don't know if the flavored mixes and
the dry whole milk do or not.

(b)- There should be no artificial colors or flavors. I believe it
is illegal to add preservatives to any dry milk sold in the U.S. so a
claim of "no preservatives" on the label is of no consequence. Other
nations may be different, however.

(c)- "Extra Grade" on the label indicates the manufacturer has held
to higher processing and quality standards and the milk is somewhat
lower in fat, moisture and bacterial content, is more soluble, and has
fewer scorched particles.

There are still some manufacturers of dry milk that sell ordinary
Grade A product, but they are becoming fewer. Every brand of instant
powdered milk in my local grocery store is the "Extra Grade", even the
generic store brand.

(d)- Try to buy your dried milk in containers of a size that makes
sense for the level of consumption in the household. Once it is opened,
powdered milk has a short shelf life before undesirable changes in
flavor and nutrient content occurs. If you buy large packages and do
not use much at one time, consider breaking it down and repackaging into
smaller containers at the time of purchase.

(e)- As with any storage food you buy, try to deal only with
reputable dealers. It is particularly important to do this with dry
milk because of its short shelf life and sensitivity to storage
conditions. Check expiration dates, then date and rotate packages.


B.2.1 STORING OF DRY MILKS

Dry milk products are especially sensitive to storage conditions,
particularly temperature and light. Vitamins A and D are photo
sensitive and will break down rapidly if exposed to light.

The area where your dry milk is stored should be kept as cool as
possible. If it is possible to do so, air-conditioning or even
refrigeration can greatly extend the nutrient shelf life.

If the storage container is transparent or translucent then it
should be put into a second container opaque to light or stored in a
dark room.

Dry milk will absorb moisture and odors from the air so storage
containers should be impervious to both air and moisture. The dryer it
can be kept, the better it will keep. Oxygen also speeds decomposition.
Powdered milk canned with nitrogen or carbon dioxide to replace air
(which contains oxygen) will keep longer than powdered milk exposed to
air. Vacuum canning also decreases the available oxygen.

If the dry milk purchased was not packaged for long term storage
then it should be repackaged right away.

I purchase the instant variety at my local grocery and repack it
when I get it home. I've seen a number of methods used for this and any
of them should work well enough for the relatively short nutritive shelf
life that this product has.

The method I use is to pour the powder into clean, dry one liter
soda bottles. I use these rather than the two liter bottles because I
don't use a lot of dry milk at any one time and the last half of the
bottle would get old before I could use it. I purchase seltzer water
this way so the bottles start clean. Once the bottles are filled I then
add a small desiccant pack and seal. The bottles are dated and stored
in the ubiquitous cool, dark place. We do not reuse the bottles. Once
the milk they contain has been used they are recycled. I haven't tried
this yet, but you could also add an O2 absorption packet to each bottle.
This might be too expensive to do with the one liter bottles, but should
be relatively inexpensive for the two liter variety. They also would
help to keep the milk from going stale before it can be used.

Another method I've seen used is to remove the paper envelopes of
milk powder from the cardboard box they come from the grocery store in
and to put them in dated plastic bags. These bags are not sealed. The
unsealed bags are then placed in a larger, air tight, opaque container.
I've heard of plastic buckets, fifty cal and 20 mm ammo cans being used
for this purpose. A healthy quantity of desiccant was also placed in
the container. This would be another area where O2 absorption packets
should serve well. It's important to remember the containers should be
clean and odor-free.

Glass canning jars could also be used for the repackaging. While
they must be guarded against breakage they offer the advantage of not
holding odors, thus allowing for reuse after suitable cleaning. Since
they are as transparent as the soda bottles, the contents must be
protected against light. If desiccant and/or O2 packets are to be used
they will have to be placed inside the jars themselves.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------

B.2.2 From: SacoFoods@aol.com (Amy Thompson)
To: Dunross@dkeep.com (Alan Hagan)
Subj: SACO Mix'n Drink Instant Pure Skim Milk
Date: May 9, 1996

Dear Mr. Hagan:

Thank you for your e-mail today and for your interest in SACO Mix'n
Drink Pure Skim Milk.

Our Mix'n Drink will keep its nutrition value for up to about two
years if kept cool and dry, and the only vitamins that actually decrease
over time are the vitamins A and D. These are not shelf-stable vitamins
and are sensitive to heat and light. A good rule of thumb to follow is
that the vitamins A and D will dissipate at a rate of about 20% every
year if stored properly. The less heat and moisture the milk is exposed
to, the better the vitamins will keep. A freezer could extend the shelf
life, as long as the powder does not get moisture in it. If you had to
put a time limit on the Mix'n Drink, for rotation purposes, I would date
it at two years after the date of purchase.


After opening a package of dry milk, transfer the powder to a
tightly covered glass or metal container (dry milk can pick up odors
from plastic containers) and keep it in the refrigerator. Unsealed
nonfat dry milk keeps for a few months; dry whole milk for a few weeks.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

B.2.3 From: SacoFoods@aol.com (Amy Thompson)
To: Dunross@dkeep.com (Alan Hagan)
Subj: SACO Mix'n Drink Instant Pure Skim Milk
Date: May 21, 1996

Dear Mr. Hagan:

Since vitamins A and D are heat and light sensitive, I would say
that your 1 1/2 year shelf life is very reasonable. If you are trying
to determine when the nutritional value has been affected more than 40%,
as you previously indicated, you should be pretty safe with that time
element, as long as it is not exposed to extreme heat.

[Eds note: We were discussing the higher average temperatures found in
Florida and other hot climates and the effect that it would have on
their dry milk's nutrient content]


C. CANNED GOODS (METAL CANS AND GLASS JARS)


1. LIQUID MILK

Preserved liquid milk comes in a number of forms, none of which are
very similar to each other. The most common forms of these packaged
milk are as follows:

C.1.1 CANNED MILKS. These are commonly called UHT milks (Ultra
High Temperature) for the packaging technique used to put them up. They
come in the same varieties as fresh liquid milks: whole, 2%, 1% and
skim. It has vitamin D added. For reasons I have not yet discovered,
the lesser fat content milks do not seem to keep for as long and their
"use by" dates are shorter term than the whole milk. This milk is
packaged in aseptic containers, either cans or laminated paper cartons.
It has the same composition as fresh milk of the same type, and can be
stored at room temperature because of the special pasteurizing process
used. The milk has a boiled flavor, but much less than evaporated milk.
The dates on the label seem to vary. I buy the whole milk and the dates
are usually for three months, but I've found them for as much six
months. The milk is still usable past their dates, but the flavor soon
begins to go stale. I am told by a friend who lived there that in
Germany not long after this kind of canned milk began to come on the
market that they were dated for a year.

With only a three to six month shelf life this type of canned milk
naturally requires a much faster rotation cycle than other types. The
only brand name for this milk I've seen is Parmalat. It's a lot of
bother, but to me it's worth it to have whole, fluid milk.

C.1.2 EVAPORATED. This is made from fresh, unpasteurized whole
milk. The process removes 60% of the water; the concentrate is heated,
homogenized, and vitamin D is added. It is then canned and heated again
to sterilize the contents. It may also have other nutrients and chemical
stabilizers added. A mixture of one part water and one part evaporated
milk will have about the same nutritional value of an equal amount of
fresh milk. There is generally no date or "use by" code on evaporated
milk.

Health and nutrition food stores often carry canned, evaporated
goat's milk, in a similar concentration.

C.1.3 SWEETENED CONDENSED. This milk goes through much less
processing than evaporated milk. It starts with pasteurized milk
combined with a sugar solution. The water is then extracted until the
mixture is less than half its original weight. It is not heated because
the high sugar content prevents spoilage. It's very high in calories,
too: 8 oz has 980 calories.

Although it is often hard to find, the label has a stamped date code
which indicates the date by which it should be consumed. Sweetened,
condensed milk may thicken and darken as it ages, but it is still
edible.


Unopened cans of evaporated milk can be stored on a cool, dry shelf
for up to six months. Canned milk (UHT) should be stored till the
stamped date code on the package (3 - 6 months). Check the date on
sweetened, condensed milk for maximum storage.


2. CORROSION PREVENTION OF CANNED GOODS

Some areas of the country have difficulty storing metal canned goods
for long periods of time. This is usually caused by very high humidity
or exposure to salt in a marine environment. If this is a problem, it
is possible to extend the life of metal cans by coating their outsides.
I've seen this used on boats here in Florida, especially when loading
for a long trip. There are three methods that can be used to do this:

C.2.1 PARAFFIN METHOD: Using a double boiler, paraffin is melted
and brushed on the clean, unrusted cans. Be certain to get a good coat
on all seams, particularly the joints. If the can is small enough, it
can be dipped directly into the wax. Care must be taken to not cause
the labels to separate from the cans. Do not leave in long enough for
the can to get warm.

C.2.2 PASTE WAX METHOD: Combine 2-3 ozs of paste or jelly wax with
a quart of mineral spirits. Warm the mixture CAREFULLY in its container
by immersing it in a larger container of hot water. DO NOT HEAT OVER AN
OPEN FLAME!. Stir the wax/spirits thoroughly until it is well mixed and
dissolved. Paint the cans with a brush in the same manner as above.
Place the cans on a wire rack until dry.

C.2.3 SPRAY SILICONE: A light coating of ordinary spray silicone
may be used to deter rust. Spray lightly, allow to dry, wipe gently
with a clean cloth to remove excess silicone.


D. SUGAR, HONEY AND OTHER SWEETENERS

Sugar and Other Sweeteners

There are a wide number of sugars to be found for purposes of
sweetening foods. Fructose is the primary sugar in fruit and honey;
maltose is one of the sugars in malted grains; pimentose are found in
olives and sucrose is what we know as granulated or table sugar. Sucrose
is a highly refined product made mostly from sugar cane though some may
still be made from sugar beets. Modern table sugar is now so highly
refined as to be virtually 100% pure and nearly indestructible if
protected from moisture. Powdered sugar and brown sugar are simple
variations on granulated sugar and share its long life.

Liquid sweeteners do not have quite the longevity of dry sugars.
Honey, molasses, corn syrup and maple syrup may crystallize or mold
during long storage. These syrups are chemically not as simple as table
sugar and therefore lose flavor and otherwise break down over a long
period of time.


D.1.1 BUYING AND STORING GRANULATED, POWDERED, BROWN AND RAW SUGARS

Buying granulated sugar and its close cousins is really a very
simple matter. Buy a brand you know you can trust and be certain the
package is clean, dry and has no insect infestation. There's very
little that can go wrong with it.

GRANULATED SUGAR. Granulated sugar does not spoil, but if it gets
damp it will likely cake up or get lumpy. If it does, it can simply be
pulverized again until it regains its granulated texture.

POWDERED SUGAR and CONFECTIONER'S SUGAR. Both names refer to the
same kind of sugar, that is white granulated sugar very finely ground.
For commercial use there is a range of textures from coarse to
ultra-fine. For home consumption, what is generally found is either
Very Fine (6X) or Ultra-Fine (10X). Not all manufacturers will indicate
the grind on the package though. Sugar refiners usually add a small
amount of corn starch to prevent caking.

Powdered sugar is as inert as granulated sugar, but it is even more
hygroscopic and will absorb any moisture present. If it absorbs more
than a little it may cake up and get hard. It's difficult to reclaim
hardened powdered sugar, but it can still be used like granulated sugar.

BROWN SUGAR. In the United States brown sugar is basically just
refined white sugar that has had a bit of molasses added to it. Dark
brown sugar has more molasses which gives it a stronger flavor, a
darker color and makes it damp. Light brown sugar has less molasses
which gives it a milder flavor, a blonder color and is slightly dryer
than the dark variety. For storage purposes you may want to just stock
the dark variety. Light brown sugar can be made by combining one fourth
to one third white sugar to the remainder dark brown sugar and blend
thoroughly.

Both varieties need to be protected from drying out, or they will
become very hard and difficult to deal with. Nor do you want to allow
them to become damper than what they already are.

There are granulated and liquid brown sugars available, but they
don't have the same cooking qualities as ordinary brown sugars. They
also don't dry out and harden quite so readily either.

RAW, NATURAL or TURBINADO SUGAR. In recent years, sugar refiners
have realized that there is a market for less refined forms of cane
sugar here in the U.S. and have begun to sell this kind of sugar under
various names and packagings. None of it is really "raw" sugar since it
is illegal to sell it in this country due to the high impurities level
in truly raw sugar. All of it has been processed in some form or fashion
to clean it, but it has not been subjected to the full refining and
whitening processes of ordinary white table sugar. This leaves some of
the natural color and a mild flavor in the sweetener. All of these less
refined sugars should be stored and handled like brown sugar.


All granulated sugars have basically the same storage requirements.
They need to be kept in air tight, insect and moisture proof containers.
For powdered, granulated and raw sugar you might want to consider using
some desiccant in the storage container if your local climate is damp.
Since brown sugars are supposed to be moist, they do not need
desiccants. Shelf life is indefinite if kept dry, but anything that you
intend to eat really should be rotated over time. Time has a way of
affecting even the most durable of foods.

I've used brown sugar that was six years old at the time it was
removed from storage and other than the molasses settling somewhat
towards the bottom it was just fine.

D.2.1 SELECTING AND BUYING HONEY

Honey is probably the oldest sweetener known to man. It predates
recorded history and has been found in the Egyptian pyramids. It's
typically sweeter than granulated sugar by a factor of 25%-40% depending
upon the specific flowers from which the bees gather their nectar. This
means a smaller amount of honey can give the same amount of sweetening
as sugar. The source flowers also dictate the flavor and the color of
the sweetener as well. Honey color can range from very dark (nearly
black) to almost colorless. As a general rule, the lighter the color
and the more delicate the flavor, the greater the price the honey will
bring. As you might expect, since honey is sweeter than table sugar, it
also has more calories as well -- 22 per teaspoon compared to granulated
sugar's 16 per teaspoon. There are also trivial amounts of minerals and
vitamins in the bee product while white sugar has none. Raw honey may
also contain minute quantities of botulinum spores and should not be fed
to children under one year of age. PLEASE READ THE POST FROM GERI
GUIDETTI CONCERNING THIS BELOW. Raw honey is OK for older children and
adults. Honey is not a direct substitute for table sugar however, it's
use in recipes may call for a bit of alteration to get the recipe to
turn out right.

Honey comes in a number of forms in the retail market and they all
have different storage characteristics:

WHOLE-COMB: This is the bee product straight from the hive. This
is the most unprocessed form in which honey comes, being found as large
pieces of waxy comb floating in raw honey. The comb itself will contain
many unopened honey cells.

RAW: This is unheated honey that has been removed from the comb. It
may contain bits of wax, insect parts and other small detritus.

FILTERED: This is raw honey that has been warmed slightly to make
it more easy to filter out small particles and impurities. Other than
being somewhat cleaner than raw honey it is essentially the same.
Most of nutrients remain intact.

LIQUID: This is honey that has been heated to higher temperatures
to allow for easier filtering and to kill any microorganisms. Usually
lighter in color, this form is milder in flavor, resists crystallization
and generally clearer. It stores the best of the various forms of honey.
Much of the trace amounts of vitamins, however, are lost.

CRYSTALLIZED or SPUN: This honey has had some of its moisture
content removed to make a creamy, spread. It is the most processed form
of honey.


Much of the honey sold in supermarkets has been blended from a
variety of different honeys and some may have even had other sweeteners
added as well. Like anything involving humans, buying honey can be a
tricky business. It pays to deal with individuals and brands you know
you can trust. You should buy and store honey labeled U.S. GRADE A or
U.S. FANCY if buying in retail outlets. However, be aware there are no
federal labeling laws governing the sale of honey, so only honey labeled
"pure" is entirely honey and not blended with other sweeteners. Honey
grading is a matter of voluntary compliance which means some producers
may be lax and sloppy about it. This can be a real nuisance when
producers use words like "organic", "raw", "uncooked" and "unfiltered"
on their labels, possibly to mislead. Fortunately, most honey producers
are quite honest in their product labeling so if you're not certain of
who to deal with, it is worthwhile to ask around to find out who
produces a good product.

Honey may also contain trace amounts of drugs used in treating
various bee ailments, including antibiotics. If this is a concern to
you, then it would be wise to investigate with your local honey producer
what has been used.

D.2.2 HONEY STORAGE

Honey is much easier to store than to select and buy. Pure honey
won't mold, but may crystallize over time. Exposure to air and moisture
can cause color to darken and flavor to intensify and may speed
crystallization as well. Comb honey doesn't store as well liquid honey
so you should not expect it to last as long.

Storage temperature is not as important for honey, but it should be
kept from freezing and not exposed to high temperatures if possible.
Either extreme can cause crystallization and heat may cause flavor to
strengthen undesirably.

Filtered liquid honey will last the longest in storage. Storage
containers should be opaque, airtight, moisture- and odor-proof. Like
any other stored food, honey should be rotated through the storage cycle
and replaced with fresh product.

If crystallization does occur, honey can be reliquified by placing
the container in a larger container of hot water until it has melted.

Avoid storing honey near heat sources and if using plastic pails
don't keep it near petroleum products (including gasoline engines),
chemicals or any other odor-producing products.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------

D.2.3 From: Geri Guidetti <arkinst@concentric.net>


Duane Miles wrote:
> 
>If I recall correctly, honey contains very, very small amounts of the
>bacteria that cause botulism. For adults, this seldom causes problems.
>Our immune system is capable of dealing with small numbers of even
>nasty bacteria, they do it all the time. The problem is when we get
>large numbers of bacteria, or when our immune system is damaged or not
>yet developed.
>
>That is where the problem with honey comes in. Some people used to use
>honey to sweeten milk or other foods for infants. Infants immune
>systems sometimes cannot handle the bacteria that cause botulism, and,
>of course, those infants became seriously ill. So pediatricians now
>advise strongly against using honey for children under a certain age.

Yes, honey can contain the temperature resistant spores of Clostridium 
botulinum, the bacterium that causes botulism. The organism is a strict 
anaerobe, meaning that it only grows in the absence of molecular oxygen.
The problem with infants and honey is that the small, intestinal tract 
of an infant apparently is sufficiently anaerobic to allow the spores to 
germinate into actively growing C. botulinum organisms. Essentially, the 
infant serves the same role as a sealed, airtight, contaminated can of 
beans as far as the organisms are concerned. There in the infant's body 
the bacteria secrete the dangerous toxin that causes the symptoms of 
botulism. There have been quite a few documented infant deaths due to 
honey. As I recall, the studies identifying honey as the source were 
done in the '80s. Most pediatricians recommend no honey for the first 
year. It is probably best to check with your own for even later 
updates...Geri Guidetti, The Ark Institute


-------------------------------------------------------------------------

D.2.4 Q: My can of honey is bulging. Is it safe to use?

A: Honey can react with the can lining to release a gas
especially when stored over a long period of time. Honey's high sugar
content prevents bacteria growth. If there is no sign of mold growth,
it is safe to eat. FREQUENTLY ASKED FOOD QUESTIONS, FN250


D.3.1 MOLASSES, CANE, SORGHUM AND TABLE SYRUPS.

Molasses and cane syrup are not precisely the same thing. Molasses
is a by-product of sugar refining and cane syrup is simply cane juice
boiled down to a syrup, in much the same way as maple syrup is produced.
Non-Southerners may know it better as "unsulphured molasses" even if
this is not completely correct. Sorghum syrup is produced in the same
manner, but sorghum cane, rather than sugar cane, is used. Sorghum
tends to have a thinner, slightly sourer taste than cane syrup. All
these syrups are generally dark with a rich, heavy flavor. There are
many "table syrups" sold in supermarkets, but close examination of the
ingredient lists will reveal mixtures of cane syrup, cane sugar syrup
and corn syrup. They usually have a much less pronounced flavor.

All of the above syrups, except for those having corn syrup in their
makeup, have the same storage characteristics. They can be stored on
the shelf for about two years and up to a year after opening. Once they
are opened, they are best kept in the refrigerator to retard mold
growth. If mold growth does occur, the syrup should be discarded. The
outside of the bottle should be cleaned of drips after each use. Some
pure cane and sorghum syrups may crystallize in storage, but this causes
no harm and they can be reliquified using the same method as for honey.


D.4.1 CORN SYRUP

Corn syrup is a liquid sweetener made by an enzyme reaction with
corn starch. Available in both a light and a dark form, the darker
variety has a flavor similar to molasses and contains refiners syrup (a
byproduct of sugar refining). Both types often contain flavorings and
preservatives. They are commonly used in baking and candy making
because they do not crystallize when heated.

Corn syrup is a poor storer compared to the other common sweeteners
and because of this it often has a "best if sold by" dating code on the
bottle. It should be stored in its original bottle, tightly capped, in
a cool, dry place. New unopened bottles keep about six months from the
date on the label. After opening, keep the corn syrup four to six
months. These syrups are very prone to mold and to fermentation so be
on the lookout for bubbling or a mold haze. If these present
themselves, throw the syrup out. You should always be certain to wipe
off any drips from the bottle after every use.

I don't recommend corn syrup as a storage food since it stores so
poorly.


D.5.1 MAPLE SYRUP

Maple syrup is probably the only sweetener that has developed a
cult-like following (OK, cane syrup has its ardent fans too). Produced
by boiling down maple sap until it reaches a syrup consistency, it is
slightly sweeter than table sugar. Maple syrup is judged by much the
same criteria as honey: lightness of color, clarity and taste. Pure
maple is generally expensive and most pancake syrups are corn and cane
sugar syrups with either natural or artificial flavorings.

New unopened bottles of maple syrup may be kept on a cool, dark,
shelf for up to two years. The sweetener may darken and the flavor get
stronger, but it is still usable.

After the bottle has been opened, it should be refrigerated. It
will last about a year. Be careful to look out for mold growth. If mold
occurs, discard the syrup.

Flavored pancake syrups should be kept and stored as corn syrups.


E. FATS AND OILS


All oils are fats, but not all fats are oils. They are very similar
to each other in their chemical makeup, but what makes one an oil and
another a fat is the percentage of hydrogen saturation in the fatty
acids of which they are composed. The fats and oils which are available
to us for culinary purposes are actually mixtures of differing fatty
acids so for practical purposes we'll say saturated fats are solid at
room temperature (70 F) and unsaturated fats we call oils are liquid at
room temperature. For dietary and nutrition purposes fats are generally
classified as saturated, monosaturated and polyunsaturated, but this is
just a further refinement of the amount of saturation of the particular
compositions of fatty acids in the fats.

E.1 Buying and Storing Oils and Fats.

There is a problem with storing oils and fats for the long term and
that is the fact that they go rancid rather quickly.

There are some general rules you can follow to get the most life out
of your stored cooking oil.

#1- Although darker colored oils have more flavor than paler ones,
they don't last as long in storage. Therefore, for longer shelf life,
buy paler colored oils.

#2- Heat, light and exposure to oxygen are the greatest factors in
rancidity of cooking oils. If you can, refrigerate your stored oils. If
possible, buy your oils in dark, opaque, airtight containers. Cooking
oils should be stored in a cool, dark area.

#3- Unless they have been specially treated or packaged, cooking oils
have a shelf life of about one year, with a few specialized oils having
a shorter life. If you don't use a great deal of it, try not to buy
your fats in large containers. This way you won't be exposing a large
quantity of oil to the air after you've opened the container.


It seems to me that buying oil in large containers and then
repackaging it into smaller, opaque, perhaps more airtight containers
would be a good thing to do. I haven't found any data on this yet so I
do not know if it would actually accomplish any useful extension of
storage life or not. If anyone reading this should happen to have any
good data on this, I'd surely like to see it.

Additionally, I'm also looking for information about the usefulness
of possibly adding anti-oxidants to slow down the oxidative rate, such
as butylated hydroxyansiole (BHA), butylated hydroxytoleune (BHT),
propyl gallate or vitamin E.



Y. COOKING STAPLES

BAKING POWDER. This powder is a combination of an acid, an alkali,
and a starch to keep the other ingredients stable
and dry. The powder reacts with liquid by foaming and the resulting
bubbles can aerate and raise dough. Almost all baking powder now on the
market is double acting, meaning it has one acid that bubbles at room
temperature and another acid which only reacts at oven temperatures.
Unless a recipe specifies otherwise, this is the type to use.

Don't expose baking powder to steam, humid air, wet spoons, or any
other moisture. Store in a tightly lidded container for no more than
a year. Even bone dry baking powder eventually loses its potency. To
test its strength, measure 1 tsp powder into 1/3 cup hot water. The
mixture should fizz and bubble furiously. If it doesn't, throw the
baking powder out.


BAKING SODA. This gritty powder is sodium bicarbonate also called
sodium acid bicarbonate (NaHCO3), a mild alkali. It
is used in baking to leaven bread and does so in the same manner as
baking powder. When combined with an acid ingredient, the bicarbonate
reacts to give off carbon dioxide bubbles which causes the baked good to
rise. If kept well sealed in an air- and moisture-proof container its
storage life is indefinite. If kept in the cardboard box it usually
comes in, it will keep for about eighteen months. Do keep in mind that
baking soda is a wonderful odor absorber. If you don't want your baked
goods tasting of whatever smells it absorbed then keeping it in an
airtight container is an excellent idea.


HERBS AND SPICES. It is difficult to give exact instructions on how
best to store culinary herbs and spices because
there are dozens of different seeds, leaves, roots, etc we call an herb
or a spice. There are, however, some general rules to be followed to
best preserve their flavors. All spices, particularly dried, are
especially sensitive to heat, air and light. Room temperature is fine
for keeping them, but they should be kept away from heat sources. It is
common for the household spice cabinet or shelf to be located over the
stove, but this is really a very poor place. Dark opaque glass is best
for storage, but failing that, keeping a tightly sealed glass container
in a dark place is next best. The cellophane packets some products come
in just won't do for storage. Tightly sealed metal containers will work
as well. Even dense plastic will do, but glass is best.

Where possible, buy spices whole. Whole nutmegs will keep their
flavor far longer than ground nutmeg, same for other seeds and roots.
You'll have to get a grater, grinder or whatever, but the difference in
flavor will be worth it.

If you buy spices in bulk containers (which is certainly cheaper)
consider transferring some into smaller containers and keeping the
larger one tightly sealed in a cool, dark place. This will prevent
unwanted light and air from continually getting in and playing havoc.

Included in the suppliers addresses is a listing for Penzey's. I
have never dealt with them myself, but they consistently get many good
reviews in the rec.cooking newsgroup for the quality and price of their
herbs and products. It might be worth your while to order a catalog.


SALT. Storage life for salt is indefinite. So long as you keep it
dry and do not let it get contaminated with dirt or whatever,
it will never go bad. Over time, iodized salt may turn yellow, but this
is harmless and may still be used. Salt it rather hygroscopic and will
adsorb moisture from the air if not sealed in an air-tight container.
If it does adsorb moisture and cakes up, it can be dried in the oven and
then broken up with no harm done.

All salt, however, is not the same. Salt comes in a number of
different varieties, each with its own purpose. Very little of the salt
produced in the U.S. is intended for use in food. The rest of it, about
98%, has other uses. Therefore, it is important to be certain the salt
you have is intended for human consumption. Once you are satisfied it
is, you should then determine its appropriateness for the tasks to which
you might want to set it to. Below is a partial list of some of the
available salts. I hope to make it more complete as I find better
information.

Table Salt: This is by far the most widely known type of salt. It
comes in two varieties; iodized and non-iodized. There
is an ingredient added to it to absorb moisture so it will stay free
flowing in damp weather. This non-caking agent does not dissolve in
water and can cause cloudiness in whatever solution it is used if
sufficiently large quantities are used. In canning it won't cause a
problem since there is very little per jar. For pickling, though, it
would be noticeable. If you are storing salt for this purpose, you
should be sure to choose plain pickling salt, or other food grade pure
salt. In the iodized varieties, the iodine can cause discoloration or
darkening of pickled foods so be certain not to use it for that purpose.

Canning Salt: This is pure salt and nothing but salt. It can
usually be found in the canning supplies section of
most stores. This is the salt to be preferred for most food
preservation or storage uses.

Kosher Salt: I'm not precisely sure what makes kosher salt
different from canning salt. I'm presuming that it
must have been processed in a particular manner in accordance with the
kosher dietary laws of the Jewish faith because it is used in
preparation of kosher foods. It is generally larger in grain size than
table or canning salt and may have even been rolled to produce "flaked"
kosher salt. Grain size can vary from manufacturer to manufacturer.

Sea Salt: This type of salt comes in about as many different
varieties as coffee and from about as many different
places around the world. The "gourmet" versions can be rather
expensive. In general, the types sold in grocery stores, natural food
markets and gourmet shops have been purified enough to use in food.
It's not very suitable for food preservation, though, because the
mineral content it contains (other than the sodium chloride) may cause
discoloration of the food.

Rock or Ice Cream Salt: This type of salt comes in large chunky
crystals and is intended primarily for use
in home ice cream churns to lower the temperature of the ice filled
water in which the churn sits. It's also sometimes used in icing down
beer kegs. It is used in food preservation by some, but none of the
brands I have been able to find label it as food grade so I would not
use it for this purpose.

Solar Salt: This is also sometimes confusingly called "sea salt".
It is not, however, the same thing as the sea salt
found in food stores. Most importantly, it is *not* food grade. It's
main purpose is for use in water softeners. The reason it is called
"solar" and sometimes "sea salt" is that it is produced by evaporation
of sea water in large ponds in various arid areas of the world. This
salt type is not purified and still contains the desiccated remains of
whatever aquatic life might have been trapped in it. Those organic
remains might react with the proteins in the foods you are attempting to
preserve and cause it to spoil.

Halite: For those of us fortunate enough to live far enough south
to not need it, halite is the salt that is used on roads to
melt snow and ice. It, too, is not food grade and should not be used in
food preservation.

Salt Substitutes: These are various other kinds of metal salts such
as potassium chloride used to substitute for the
ordinary sodium chloride salt we are familiar with. They have their
uses, but should not be used in foods undergoing a heated preservation
processing, they can cause the product to taste bad. Even the heat from
normal cooking is sometimes sufficient to cause this.

VINEGAR: There is vinegar and then there is vinegar and it is
not all alike. The active ingredient in all vinegars is
acetic acid, but what the sour stuff is made from can vary widely. The
most common vinegar is the white distilled variety which is actually
just diluted distilled acetic acid and not true vinegar at all. It
keeps pretty much indefinitely if tightly sealed in a plastic or glass
bottle with a *plastic* cap. The enamel coated metal caps always seem
to get eaten by the acid over time. It is usually about 5-6% acetic
acid and for pickling it is the type most often called for.

The next most common variety is apple cider vinegar. There are two
kinds of this type. A "cider flavored" distilled acetic acid type and a
true cider vinegar fermented from hard cider. Either will store
indefinitely at room temperature until a sediment begins to appear on
the bottom. Stored vinegar will sometimes develop a cloudy substance.
This is called a "mother of vinegar" and it is harmless. As long as the
liquid does not begin to smell foul it can be filtered out through
cheesecloth or a coffee filter and rebottled in a clean container. The
mother can even be used to make more vinegar. If it begins to smell bad,
however, it's gone over and should be tossed out.

The more exotic wine vinegars, balsalmic and other types all can be
stored like cider vinegar. Age and exposure to light and air, however,
eventually begin to take their toll on their delicate flavors. Tightly
capped in a cool, dark cabinet or refrigerator is best for their storage.


YEAST: Yeast is just not a product you can stow away and forget
about until you need it next year. It is, after all, a
living organism and if it's not alive at the time you need it, you won't
get any use out of it. This ancient leavening, brewing, fermenting
agent is a single celled microscopic fungus. When we incorporate it
into our bread dough, beer wort or fruit juice it begins to reproduce
madly (we hope) and produce several by-products. If you're baking, the
by-product you want is carbon dioxide which is trapped by the dough and
subsequently causes it to rise. In brewing or vintning what is wanted
is the ethyl alcohol. Almost all yeasts used for these purposes are in
the same genus (Saccharomyces or "sugar fungi"), but many different
species have evolved and some are more suitable for a particular task
than others. It's entirely possible to use grocery store bread yeast to
brew beer or ferment wine, but the results may leave a great deal to be
desired. It's also possible to use yeast from beer brewing to make
bread and from what I've read the results were pretty much
indistinguishable from bread yeast.

Leaving aside the brewing and vintning yeasts which are really
outside the scope of this FAQ I am going to concentrate on bread yeast.
It comes in two generally available forms; compressed or fresh and
dried, sometimes called granular or instant active dry yeast. They are
different genetic strains of the same species, but have different
characteristics.

Compressed yeast is only partly dried (about 70% moisture) and
requires refrigeration and keeps even better in the deep freeze. If
kept in an air- and moisture-tight container to prevent it from
desiccating this type of yeast will keep for a year in the freezer (0
degs F or less, but only about two weeks (maybe a bit more) in the
refrigerator. Unless your kitchen is rather chilly it will not keep on
the shelf. It should not have a mottled color or a sour odor.

Dried yeast has only an 8% moisture content and comes packed in foil
envelopes. The smaller single use packets are not generally vacuum
packed, but the larger commercial sized "bricks" of about a pound or two
each generally are. They can last for months on the shelf, up till the
expiration date which should be clearly stamped on the package. If
packaged in the same manner as recommended for compressed yeast above
and kept in the refrigerator or freezer it can last for several years.
The larger packs of yeast should be transferred to an air and moisture
tight container after opening.

Either type of yeast can be tested for viability by "proofing" them.
This is nothing more than mixing a small amount of the yeast with an
equal amount of sugar in warm water (105-115 deg F for dried; 95 deg F
for fresh). Within about five minutes active yeast will become bubbly
and begin to expand (at normal room temperature). Yeast which only
slowly becomes active can still be used, but you will have to use more
of it. If it shows no activity at all, it's dead and should be thrown
out.

There is another means of providing yeast for baking besides buying
it from the grocery store and that is by using a sourdough starter. I'm
not going to address it here, but I will point out that it has a
newsgroup all its own (rec.food.sourdough) and several FAQ's devoted to
it. Drop in and read for awhile and you'll learn more than you thought
you could ever want to know.


Z. INFANT FORMULA


Since most folks into preparedness of one sort or another are
planning for families, real or as yet hypothetical, I thought it
important to include something on infant formula. Most baby food that
comes in jars can be treated like canned goods of types meant for
adults. Formula, though, is something else. I have to admit, that not
yet having kids of my own, I've not given this much thought before so
the below is taken from the book KEEPING FOOD FRESH, by Janet Bailey
(see book list). In the future, if some of you readers will send it to
me and/or I come up with more information from my own researches I want
to expand this section on infant/child food storage.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Prepared infant formula is primarily water and nonfat cow's milk.
Among other ingredients, it contains sweeteners; sometimes lactose which
is milk sugar; and sometimes corn syrup or other sugars. Coconut and
soybean oils are common; vitamin and mineral supplements are universal.
A few 