Section Two
Version 2.00
Updated April, 1997
Supersedes Ver 1.10


             PRUDENT FOOD STORAGE: Questions and Answers.

                           Section Two

                 How Do I Keep It From Going Bad?

                   From the House at Cat's Green
                          Alan T. Hagan

                     Hope clouds observation.

                                  Bene Gesserit saying
                                  from Frank Herbert's DUNE


Updated: 9/18/96; 4/16/97

Copyright (c)1997 Alan T. Hagan.  All rights reserved.

Excluding contributions attributed to specific individuals all
material in this work is copyrighted to Alan T. Hagan and all rights are
reserved. This work may be copied and distributed freely as long as the
entire text, my and the contributor's names and this copyright notice
remain intact, unless my prior permission has been obtained.  This FAQ
may not be distributed for financial gain, included in commercial
collections or compilations, or included as a part of the content of any
website without prior, express permission from the author.


PLEASE DIRECT CONTRIBUTIONS, COMMENTS, QUESTIONS AND CRITICISMS TO:
athagan@sprintmail.com

Written material may be sent to the following address below:

A.T. Hagan
P.O.Box 140008
Gainesville, FL   32614-0008



                 TABLE OF CONTENTS


III.   Spoilage

        A.  Insect Infestations
          1.  Pests of Stored Dry Grains and Legumes
          2.  Control of Insect Infestations
          
        B.  Molds In Foods
          1.  Minimizing Molds
          2.  Molds in Canned Goods
          3.  Molds in Grains and Legumes

        C.  Bacterial Spoilage
          1.  Botulism
          2.  Other Bacterial Spoilers In Food

        D.  Enzymatic Action In Food Spoilage



=========================================================================
III -- SPOILAGE
=========================================================================

A -- Insect Infestations

A.1 Pests of Stored Dry Grains and Legumes.

Insect infestations can occur in a wide variety of foodstuffs such
as flours, meals, pastas, dried fruits and vegetables, nuts, sweets,
whole grains, beans, sugars, TVP, jerky, bird seed and pet foods.

Naturally, the best way to deal with an insect infestation is not to
have one in the first place. Try to purchase from suppliers who are
clean and have a high volume of turnover of their products. This will
mean the products you purchase will be unlikely to have bugs in them.

When you buy such foodstuffs examine them closely to be sure they
are insect free. Check for any packaging or "use by" dates to insure
their freshness. Don't shake the package, most adult insects will be
found in the top couple of inches of the product and shaking the package
will mix them into the contents and disguise them. If the package does
turn out to be infested, return it for replacement.

Once you have purchased the product you should store it in an air-
and moisture-tight container so it cannot be invaded after you have
brought it home. With sufficient time, adult and some larval insect
forms can penetrate paper, cardboard and thin plastic packaging. Your
containers should be either heavy plastic, glass or metal with tight
fitting lids. As with everything in food storage, you should use older
packages before newer ones and opened packages before unopened ones.

The storage area should be kept clean. Don't allow grain, flour,
beans, bits of pasta or other food particles to accumulate on shelves or
the floor. Cracks and crevices should be sealed or otherwise blocked.
Unless it is a sticky spill, vacuuming is the best method of cleaning
since cleaning with soap and water can wash food particles into the
cracks.

Insects may get their start in chairs, sofas and carpets where food
is dropped and not cleaned up. Don't forget to replace the filter bag
on the vacuum since some insects can survive and reproduce in the bag
after they've been sucked into it.

Bags of dry pet food and bird seed can also harbor insect
infestation. Decorative foodstuffs such as ears of colorful indian
corn, colored beans and hard squashes can carry insects that can infest
your edible food. Even poison baits can harbor flour beetles.


A.2 Control of Insect Infestations

Should you find that in spite of buying fresh products and using
careful packaging techniques you have an insect infestation you can try
some of the following steps:


1. If the food is too heavily infested to try to save then it
should be disposed of as soon as possible. Don't leave it in the
kitchen or food storage area any longer than necessary so it won't
infest other foods.

2. Large bugs can be sifted or winnowed out if it's not too heavily
infested and you want to try to save it. Then treat it by placing into
a deep freezer at 0 F for three to seven days depending upon the size of
the package. Refrigerator freezers usually do not freeze low enough to
effectively kill all of the life stages of insects, but if left there,
will slow their development. If freezing is not workable then the
product could be spread on baking sheets and heated to 150 F for fifteen
to twenty minutes, cooled and repackaged. Heat treated foods should be
consumed shortly thereafter.

3. The surface areas where the food *containers* are stored can be
treated with an insecticide. This is not a replacement for clean
storage habits and good containers, but it can supplement it. This will
not control insect infestations already in your stored foods.

Spray the shelf surface with 0.5% chlorpyrifos (Dursban),
1% propoxur (Baygon), 0.5 percent diazinon, or 0.25 percent resmethrin.
You can find any of these in the hardware store in ready to apply
packages. If a sprayer isn't usable then they can be applied with a
paint brush. Allow the solution to dry thoroughly. Cover the shelves
with clean, untreated shelf paper and put properly packaged foods back
on shelves. READ THE PRODUCT LABEL FOR SAFETY INFORMATION CONCERNING
CHILDREN AND PETS.

Household bleach, Lysol and other sterilizers will not control
insect infestation, though they can be used for mold, mildew and algae.

You may continue to find some insects after the cleanup is finished.
This could be for several reasons. The first being they escaped from
the packages they were infesting and did not get cleaned up. There may
be more packages infested than were originally realized or, there may be
hiding places in the storage area that need attention. Once you have
carefully eliminated all food sources, the bugs should disappear in
three to four weeks.



B -- Molds in Food.

Molds are fungi just like mushrooms and yeast. Also like mushrooms,
they reproduce by releasing spores into the air that land on everything,
including your food and food storage containers. When those spores
begin to grow, they create thin threads that spread through out their
growing medium. These threads are the roots of the mold fungus, called
mycelium. The stalk of a mold fungus is the portion above or on the
surface of the food. It produces the spores and gives the mold its
color. We've all seen examples of this when we discover a dish of
something or other left way-y-y too long in the refrigerator and has
become covered in mold fuzz.

Molds can grow anywhere they have a growing medium (their food),
sufficient moisture and enough warmth. Some can even grow at
refrigerator temperatures, albeit more slowly than they would if it were
warmer. They can also withstand much more salt and sugar than bacteria,
which is why you sometimes find mold in jellies and jams with their high
sugar content and on cured products like ham or bacon with their high
salt content.

In the past, it was often felt a slight amount of mold was harmless
and the food could be consumed anyway. For molds that were
intentionally introduced into the food, such as the mold in bleu cheese,
this is just fine. For the unintentional molds, it can be a very
serious error in judgment. These unwanted molds might just be producing
a toxic substance called a "mycotoxin" which can be very bad indeed.
Mycotoxins are produced around the root or mycelium of the mold and the
mold roots can penetrate very deeply into the food. These mycotoxins
can survive for a long time in foods, and unfortunately most are not
destroyed by cooking. The molds probably best known for this are the
various Aspergillus varieties which produces a mycotoxin known as
"aflatoxin", but there are other dangerous molds as well, such the
Fusarium molds. Both of the above affect grain and some legumes.

In wet pack foods such as your home canned goodies, molds can do
something else, possibly leading to lethal consequences. If they are
present in wet pack food by reasons of improper procedure or
contamination after the fact, they can consume the natural acids present
in the food. The effect of this is to *raise* the pH of the food in the
container, perhaps to the point that it becomes possible for spores of
Clostridium botulinum, better known as "botulism", to become active and
reproduce. If you're not already aware of the consequences of botulism
poisoning, please read the bacterial spoilage section below where it has
an entry all its own. There are few kinds of food poisoning with as
deadly serious consequences. For this reason, moldy wet pack foods
should be discarded.


B.1 Minimizing Molds

You can do a number of things to minimize unwanted mold growth in
your kitchen, food storage areas and refrigerators. If your kitchen is
at all like mine, it is the refrigerator that is going to collect the
most fungal growth. This can be dealt with by washing the inside every
couple of months with a tablespoon of baking soda dissolved in a quart
of warm water. Rinse clean and allow to dry. The black mildew that
grows on the rubber door gaskets and other places can be dealt with by
wiping down with a solution of three tablespoons of household bleach in
a quart of water. I generally use a soft bristle brush for this.

The rest of the kitchen can be kept mold free by keeping it clean,
and dry and by spraying occasionally with a product such as Lysol.
Patches of mold growing in spots can be eliminated with the bleach
solution used on the refrigerator doors.

Try not to purchase more fresh food than you'll be able to eat in a
short period of time. This will keep you from having to deal with the
moldy remains that didn't get eaten. If food does go moldy, *don't
sniff it*. This is a good way to give yourself respiratory difficulties
if you are at all susceptible to mold allergies. Moldy food should be
disposed in such a manner that your animals and children won't be able
to get into it. Mycotoxins are every bit as bad for your animals as
they are for you.

Obviously, you don't have to throw out everything that shows a spot
of mold on it. Some foods can be safely dealt with and still partially
saved if they show signs of fungal growth. Below is a set of guideline
from M. Susan Brewer, Ph.D., R.D., a specialist in food safety. Her
articles and works are found in many state university extension services
publications lists.


If the food shows even a tiny mold spot, follow these guide lines:

1. Hard or firm foods with tiny mold spots can be trimmed; cut
away the area around the mold (at least an inch) and rewrap
in clean wrap. Make sure that knife does not touch the
mold.

2. Soft foods such as cheese slices, cream cheese, sour cream
and yogurt should be thrown away.

TOSS: 

Soft Cheeses, (Mozzarella Brie) 
Sour Cream, Yogurt, Cottage cheese
Bacon, Hot dogs, Sliced lunch meats 
Meat pies 
Opened canned ham 
Most left-over food 
Bread, Cakes, rolls, flour, pastry 
Peanut butter
Juices, berries
Jam, Jellies, Syrups
Cucumbers, Tomatoes
Spinach, Lettuce, other leafy vegetables
Bananas, Peaches, Melons
Corn-on-the-cob
Stored nuts, whole grains, rice

TRIM:

Hard Cheese (Cheddar, Swiss)
Bell Peppers, Carrots, Cabbage
Broccoli, Cauliflower, Brussels Sprouts
Garlic, Onions
Potatoes, Turnips
Zucchini
Apples, Pears



B.2 Molds in Canned Goods

If good equipment and proper technique are used, then it is unlikely
you will ever have mold growth in your unopened canned goods. If you do
have such, then there was either a flaw in the procedure you used, or
something affected the jar or can after the fact to break its seal. In
any event, once the food has molded, it is past saving and should be
discarded in such a way that children and animals will not be able to
get into it.

The most likely home canned products to show mold growth are jams
and jellies sealed with paraffin wax. There are a number of points in
the canning process where this can occur. 1 - in the time after the jar
is taken out of its boiling water bath, but before it is filled, 2 - in
the time between when the jar is filled and covered with the melted wax,
3 - when the wax cools, if it pulls away from the side of the jar,
leaving an opening for the mold to get in, and 4 - if bubbles form in
the paraffin, which break and leave holes. It is for this reason that
most canning authorities no longer recommend using this technique. If
you must use it, the jelly jars should be boiled for at least 10 minutes
before the jelly is poured into the jars. The filled and wax capped
jars should then be covered with some sort of protective lid. The book,
*Putting Food By* has excellent instructions on this or see the
applicable section of the rec.food.preserving FAQ by Leslie Basel.


B.3 Molds in Grains and Legumes

It's long been known that eating moldy grain is bad for your health.
The ugly consequences of eating ergot-infected rye probably make the
best known example. It's only been for about thirty years, though, that
intensive study of these grain fungi have been carried out on other
varieties of molds and their respective mycotoxins. Fortunately, for
those of us in the U.S., the USDA and the various state departments of
agriculture go to a great deal of trouble to detect grain and legumes
infected with these toxic fungi. In some of the less developed
countries, the citizenry are not so lucky. Still, it is good to have
something of an understanding of what one should do to prevent mold
growth in one`s stored grains and to have an idea of what to look for and
ask about when purchasing grains and legumes.

The one fungal type that has caused the most commotion in recent
history are the various Aspergillus species of molds. Under certain
conditions with certain grains, legumes and to a lesser extent, nuts,
they can produce a mycotoxin called "aflatoxin". This is a serious
problem in some parts of the world, most especially in peanuts,
occasionally in corn. There have been no deaths I am aware of in the
United States from aflatoxicity, though other countries have not been so
fortunate. What makes aflatoxin so worrisome in this country is that it
is also a very potent carcinogen (cancer causing agent).

In addition to the Aspergillus molds, there is also a very large
family of molds called Fusarium and these can produce a wide variety of
mycotoxins, all of which you do not want to be eating directly or
feeding to your animals where you will get it indirectly when you eat
them.

The Federal government and the various state governments
continuously monitor food and forage crops. Those products which are
prone to mold growth and toxin production are not allowed to be sold for
food. Once purchased however, it is up to you to keep your food safe
from mold growth. If you have already found mold growth in your whole
grains, meals, flours or other grain products, they should be discarded.
Most mycotoxins are not broken down or destroyed by cooking temperatures
and there is no safe way to salvage grain that has molded.


B.3.1 Preventing Mold Growth In Stored Grains and Legumes.

The easiest method to prevent mold growth in your stored grains and
legumes is simply to keep them too dry for the mold to grow. The
Aspergillus and Fusarium molds require moisture contents of 18% and
above to reproduce. This is subject to some variability, but in all
grains and soybeans, they must have a moisture content of that level.
If you are storing raw (not roasted) peanuts, in the shell or shelled,
you want to get the moisture content to less than 8% as peanuts are
particularly susceptible to mold growth. The recommended moisture
content for all other grain and legume storage is no more than 10%.
(Please see part 2.A.3.1 Grains and Legumes for a method to determine
moisture content.) At 10% moisture, it is simply too dry for fungi to
grow. (Please see 1.A.4 STORING GRAINS AND LEGUMES for a suitable
packaging technique.)



C -- Bacterial Spoilage

Just like the fungi, bacteria are everywhere. They're in the
water, soil, air, on you, your food and your food storage containers.
Fortunately, the vast majority of the bacteria we encounter are
relatively harmless and only a few represent a danger to us and our
stored foods.

Bacteria can be very much more difficult to kill off than molds and
insects. Some of them are capable of continued growth at temperatures
that would kill other spoilage organisms. When conditions are such that
they are unable to grow, some bacteria can go dormant and form spores.
These spores can be quite hardy, even to the point of surviving a
rolling boil.

In order to grow, bacteria need moisture, some as little as a 20%
moisture content. For dry grains, legumes, powdered milk and other low
moisture foodstuff bacterial spoilage will seldom be a problem so long
as the moisture level in the foodstuff remains too scant to support its
growth. For this reason, it is imperative that such products be drier
than 20% and preferably below 10% to ward off mold growth as well. The
botulism bacteria need moisture in the 35% range to grow. Thus, using
desiccants in your food packaging is also an excellent idea.

It is in wet pack canned goods (where the container has free liquid
in it) and fresh foods we must be the most concerned about spoilage
bacteria. It is here that a little bad luck and a moment's inattention
to what you are doing could kill or seriously injure you or some other
person who eats the foods you've put by. In both home-canned and
commercially-canned goods, IF THE CAN IS BULGING, LEAKING, SMELLS BAD,
OR SPEWS LIQUID WHEN YOU OPEN IT THEN THROW IT OUT!


C.1 Botulism

C. botulinum is one of the oldest types of life forms found on the
planet. Like the gangrene bacteria, it is an anaerobic organism meaning
it lives and grows in the absence of free oxygen. It forms spores when
conditions are not suitable for it to grow and it is commonly found in
the soil. This means it can be brought into your life on raw produce,
tools, hands or anything else that came into contact with dirt. To
further complicate matters, botulinum spores are extremely heat-hardy.
The bacteria itself can be killed by exposing them for a short time to
boiling water (212 F AT *SEA LEVEL PRESSURE*), but their spores can not.
To kill them, the food product and container must be exposed to
temperatures of 240 F (AGAIN AT *SEA LEVEL PRESSURE*) for a long enough
period of time. Only a pressure canner can reach the necessary
temperature.

It's not the bacteria or its spores which are directly deadly, but
the toxin the bacteria creates when it grows and reproduces. In its
pure form, botulism toxin is so potent that a mere teaspoon of it would
be enough to provide a fatal dose to hundreds of thousands of people.
It is this lethality that is why every responsible book on canning, food
preservation, food storage, and the like hammers constantly on the need
for care in technique and method and why spoilage must be taken so
seriously.

C. botulinum, like any other life form, must have suitable
conditions for it to grow and become a danger to you. One of the
conditions it must have is a suitable pH range in its environment. pH is
the measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance and is measured
on a scale of 1-14 with anything above 7 being considered alkaline and
everything below 7 being considered acid. If the pH of your wet pack
food is BELOW 4.6 then botulism is unable to grow. Keep in mind pH is
not eternal in foods and it is possible for it to change. If it should
change to a lesser acidity than 4.6 pH your previously botulinum proof
food may start allowing the lethal spoiler to grow (see B.2, molds in
canned goods). This is why it is vital to use proper technique, even
for acid f